Operation Workflow Specification & Implementation (#2071)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/references/agent/operation-workflow.md

---
title: 🚧 User-defined Operation Workflows
tags: [Reference, MQTT, Operations]
sidebar_position: 7
---

import ProposalBanner from '@site/src/components/ProposalBanner'

<ProposalBanner/>

## Overview

> An agent developer can define application specific [operation workflows](./device-management-api.md#mqtt-driven-workflows).

Author: Added

- User-provided scripts handle domain-specific checks (in blue)
  to timely schedule the command as well as to ensure the configuration file is not corrupted and properly installed.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> init
    init --> download
    download --> downloaded
    downloaded --> install
    install --> installed 
    installed --> successful
    init --> failed
    download --> failed
    downloaded --> failed
    install --> failed
    installed --> failed
    successful --> [*]
    failed --> [*]
    
    classDef specific color:blue;
    class init, downloaded, installed specific
    
    classDef plugin color:red;
    class download, install plugin
       
    classDef mapper color:black;
    class successful, failed mapper
```

### Key points

Observe on the example that:

- At any state, *one and only one* participant is responsible to move the operation forward.
- Publishing a state to the MQTT command topic, can be seen as passing the baton from one participant to another.
  The mapper creates the **init** state and then lets the other components work.

>   The plugin tell the download has been successful by publishing the **downloaded** state,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The agent tells the download has been successful by publishing the **downloaded** state,
```

Author: Fixed

  but do nothing till the domain-specific component has checked the file and move the command state to **install**.
- Each software component has to know only *some* states of the whole workflow:
  - the states they are responsible for
  - the states they create to pass the control.

> - The compatibility of two participants, one publishing the state owned by the other, is only defined by the message payload:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The compatibility of two participants, one advancing to the new state owned by the other, is only defined by the message payload:
```

Author: changed

  - all the property fields, required to make progress at some state, must be provided by the previous participant.

### Benefits

The benefits are that:
- A participant can be substituted by another implementation as long as the substitute implementation

>   is ready to process at least all the state processed by the former implementation.

Author: Fixed

  - This is the key principle used by thin-edge to provide extensible operation support.

>   - The **tedge-agent** defines the **init**, **downloaded**, **installed** states

Author: Changed

    with no specific behavior beyond proceeding to the next step;
    so, a domain specific component can be substituted to add extra checks and actions before moving forward.
- Extra states and participants can be added as long as each state is owned by one participant.
  - For instance, an agent developer can introduce a **rollback** state in the `firmware_update` workflow,
    associated by another software component responsible for these rollbacks.

> Furthermore, specific versions of the same workflow can be defined on different targets.

Reviewer 2: We can just remove this sentence to reduce the scope of the feature for now.

```
Furthermore, specific versions of the same workflow can be defined on different targets.
```

> Furthermore, specific versions of the same workflow can be defined on different targets.

Author: No, my point is that the main and child devices can each run their own version of a workflow for an operation.

Added a clarification sentence.

Indeed, all the status updates for a command on a given thin-edge entity or component

> are published on an MQTT topic which prefix is the entity identifier.

Author: Updated

- The same executable can be used to handle operations on different targets.
  For instance, the **tedge-agent** can run on the main device `te/device/main//`
  as well as on a child-device identified by `te/device/child-xyz//`.
- A specific executable can be substituted on a specific target.
  If for some reasons, **tedge-agent** cannot be installed on a child-device,

>   then a specific implementation of the `firmware_update` MQTT API can be used to serve configuration updates

Author: Fixed

  - The transition from a *no-op* state must be handled either by thin-edge as direct transition
    or overridden by the user with domain-specific checks and actions.
  - The terminal states, a.k.a **successful** and **failed**, are owned by the process which created the **init** state (in practice, the mapper).
    Only this process should clear the retained message state for an operation instance by sending an empty payload on command's topic.

### Workflow Overriding

Thin-edge provides a mechanism to override, extend and combine workflows.

This mechanism is provided by the **tedge-agent** which gathers a set of user-defined workflows
and combined them with the builtin workflows implemented by the agent itself.

Each workflow is defined using a TOML file stored in `/etc/tedge/operations`. Each specifies:
- the command name that it should trigger on
  such as `firmware_update` or `restart`- the list of states
- for each state:
  - the state name as defined by the operation API
  - the set of states which can be an outcome for this state actions
  - possible extra instructions on how to process the command at this stage, e.g.
    - run a script

> ```toml title="file: firmware_update_example.toml"

Reviewer 2: Though this is in a section called "workflow overriding", so it is meant to show different states.

> ```toml title="file: firmware_update_example.toml"

Reviewer: Okay, in that case it might be a good idea to add a workflow file example conforming to that same simple example somewhere earlier: may be, in the `Operation API` section itself, right after the intro of the APIs, so that we have something basic before getting into advanced overriding here.

> ```toml title="file: firmware_update_example.toml"

Reviewer 2: Yeah we can add this in later.

operation = "firmware_update"

[init]
  script = "/usr/bin/firmware_handler.sh plan"

>   next = ["scheduled", "failed"]

Reviewer: It may be obvious from these examples, but it might be better to explicitly document that the first value is the target state on a successful state action and the second one is for failure.

Reviewer 2: The order of values does not mean anything at this point in time.

Reviewer: I'm missing something here then. My understanding was that, if the script exits with non-zero exit code, without any JSON output with explicit `status`, then the workflow moves to the first state mentioned in the array. In the case of a script execution failure, it moves to the second. Isn't that the case?

Reviewer 2: That isn't implemented yet, and we are still deciding on what to do there. This will be done in a follow up PR

Author: For now, this list is mostly documentation.

[scheduled]
  next = ["install"]

[install]
  script = "/usr/bin/firmware_handler.sh install ${.payload.url}"
  next = ["reboot", "failed"]

[reboot]
  next = "verify"

[verify]
  script = "/usr/bin/firmware_handler.sh verify"
  next = ["commit", "rollback"]

[commit]
  next = ["successful", "rollback_reboot"]

[rollback]
  script = "/usr/bin/firmware_handler.sh rollback"
  next = ["rollback_reboot"]

[rollback_reboot]
  next = ["failed"]

[successful]
  next = []

[failed]
  next = []
```

Thin-edge combines all these workflows to determine what has to be done
when a state message is published for a command on a topic matching the global topic filter for commands,
i.e. `te/+/+/+/+/cmd/+/+`.
- Each running instance of the __tedge_agent__ reacts only on commands targeting its own device.
- If a user-defined workflow has been defined for this operation, then this workflow is used to determine the required action.

> - If no workflow has been defined for the user for this operation, then the built-in workflow is used.

Author: Fixed

Data extracted from the command status topic and message payload can be passed as argument to the script.

- `"/bin/new-command.sh ${.topic} ${.payload}"` passes two arguments to the `/bin/new-command.sh` program.
  - The first one is the full command request topic (*e.g.* `te/device/main/cmd///restart/c8y-mapper-123`).
  - The second one is the full json payload (*e.g.* `{"status': "init"}`).
- Specific path expressions can be used to pass specific excerpts.
  - `${.}` is a json for the whole message including the `topic` and the `payload`.
  - `${.topic}` is the command request topic (*e.g.* `te/device/main/cmd///restart/c8y-mapper-123`)
  - `${.topic.target}` is the command target identity  (*e.g.* `device/main/cmd//`)
  - `${.topic.operation}` is the command operation  (*e.g.* `restart`)
  - `${.topic.cmd_id}` is the command request unique identifier  (*e.g.* `c8y-mapper-123`)
  - `${.payload}` is the whole command json payload (*e.g.* `{"status': "init"}`)
  - `${.payload.status}` is the command current status (*e.g.* `"init"`)
  - `${.payload.x.y.z}` is the json value extracted from the payload following the given `x.y.z` path if any.

>   - If given `${.some.unknown.path}`, the argument is passed unchanged to the script.

Reviewer: Shouldn't that be a failure, as it indicates an unexpected JSON output, which doesn't conform to the format that the script expected?

Reviewer 2: By passing the value to the script at least it gives the script a chance to run some custom logic (e.g. cleaning up, print a more usable error message etc.).

We could look at adding a "strict" mode later if needed.

  next = ["reboot", "failed"]

[reboot]
  next = "verify"

[verify]
  script = "/usr/bin/firmware_handler.sh verify"
  next = ["commit", "rollback"]

[commit]
  next = ["successful", "rollback_reboot"]

[rollback]
  script = "/usr/bin/firmware_handler.sh rollback"
  next = ["rollback_reboot"]

[rollback_reboot]
  next = ["failed"]

[successful]
  next = []

[failed]
  next = []
```

Thin-edge combines all these workflows to determine what has to be done
when a state message is published for a command on one topic matching the global topic filter for commands,
i.e. `te/+/+/+/+/cmd/+/+`. Given an actual command state message, thin-edge
- keeps only the workflows which target topic filter matches the topic of the message
- then keeps only the workflows that define a behavior for the state of the message payload
- and then uses priority rules to select a single workflow: the workflow ruling this command at that stage

The priority rules give a higher priority to the workflow that are user-defined than to those pre-defined by thin-edge.
If several user-defined workflows are matching a command state,
then the alphabetic order of the workflow definition file names is used:

> `001-firmware_update_workflow.toml` being of higher priority than `002-firmware_update_workflow.toml`.

Author: This has not been implemented and has to be removed.

In the current settings, this is an error to provide two definitions for the same operation on a given device.

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/2071/commits/ce7a46b588ffa78c9e2d23fbb9ee205cd614b959
